Abstract:
As artificial intelligence continues to evolve, digital avatars are emerging as an important interface for personalized learning, yet conventional systems are either solely based on fixed scripting and rule-based logic or entirely on LMM which oftentimes hallucinate because they are simply a prediction of the next ‘character/word’  often lacking deep contextual awareness and adaptive reasoning. This thesis intends to propose an ontology-driven integration of large language models (LLMs) and AI avatars to enhance personalized educational content selection within the STEM domain. By utilizing existing technologies like OWL, RDF, and SPARQL-a domain-specific ontology developed to systematically organized critical education data such as “learner profiles, learning objectives, and instructional materials (curriculum)” which will be integrated as embeddings to the LLMs providing more context. The proposed system in this thesis integrates this ontology with an LLM possessing an extensive context window (Anthropic Claude) and open-source avatar frameworks like Rasa, DeepPavlov and OpenAvatar. This integration will enable dynamic inference of contextual insight and generate adaptive human-like responses during AI-human interaction drastically reducing hallucination. At the end of this paper, we will demonstrate the advantage of using an ontology based system in a personalized education platform compared to solely depending on LMMs or strict hard coded rules.

Introduction:
Improving the quality of STEM education through personalization is a long-standing challenge in academia. The National Academy of Engineering declared the advancement of personalized learning as one of its 14 grand challenges in engineering (NAE, “Nae grand challenges: Advance personalized learning,” 2009.), also due to instructor resource constraints, limited school budgets and large classroom sizes, it is humanly impossible for every tutor to individually tutor every single student in a way the fits their ideal preferences, therefore typical educational methods lean more towards  a one-size-fits-all approach.

In recent years, advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT-4, have opened new possibilities for creating intelligent tutoring systems that can interact with students in natural language. AI driven avatars which are digital characters that can communicate with students promises an engaging way of delivering personalized and fun instructions. 
However, several intelligent tutoring systems often lack the ability to deeply understand subject matters leading to generic feedback and may provide irrelevant information when the students is stuck. That is why, this thesis focuses on investigating whether integrating an ontology-based knowledge model with an LLM-driven avatar can improve the personalization of STEM education which will enable AI tutors to deliver accurate, personalized assistance in STEM subjects by equipping it with domain knowledge.
